# PredictFuture

This is a book we (myself and Vincent Mutolo) are working on explaining various quantitative and qualitative methods of prediction.  There are books out there that delve into statistics in society, but this one hopefully will also show the shortcomings of statistical methods, and also show that some predictions based in physics rather than statistics.  


Prediction is the basis of so much of our lives, whether we realize it or not.  We predict everything.  Whether it be when we have to wake up, whether our joke will be funny, or whether or not the quantum tunneling effect will have a significant impact on our telescope calibration.  Some of these predictions are qualitative, ie we make the decision based on how we feel, and some our quantitative, ie we have some measureable description of what we are predicting and use it to make our prediction.  This book focuses on quantitative, (a) because these methods are less well known and we think about them less and (b) because sometimes numbers tell a really good story.  With a basic equation derived by a really, really smart guy 400 years ago, if I know the weight of a penny and the height of the Empire State Building, I can tell you the speed a penny will hit the ground with if I drop it off the top.  With one line of math.  Easy right?

Well, there is a caveat. As with most quantitative predictions, there are many assumptions made.  One, I assumed there was no resistance.  Why?  Well, it made the math a lot easier, and the example hopefully more powerful.  To solve with air resistance takes some more physics and math background than a one line equation.  But, it is *probably* unnecessary.  As most of us have noticed, pennies tend to fall relatively smoothly in the air, unlike say, a feather.  Our qualitative observation that pennies are not impeded by air informed our assumptions which led us to a reasonably accurate prediction on the final speed of the penny.  The alternative, that is to solve the problem without any qualitative insight, is to drop our assumptions.  For the average person, this means taking an advanced undergraduate course in mechanics as well as differential equations, a task not necessarily for the faint of heart (although my college mechanics professor never missed the opportunity to tell us "it is so obvious!").

Some topics covered will probably be familiar, such as some basic statistical background and history.  We will also disuss "machine learning", gambling, mathematical chaos, logistics, all of which may be familiar to readers of this genre.  Where I think this book differs is in the rest of the chapter. We have a chapter describing quantum mechanics, and its inherent "unpredictability".  We will talk about the Drake equation, a famous predictor of alien life in our universe, its reliability, and the obvious implication.  We also aim to separate probability from statistics.  For example, there are some cool probability/combinatoric results, such as the German tank problem which are of interest that are not derived from data, and are cool to see, despite not being the main point of the book.

One of the main endeavours we undertake is to also show where qualitative methods are appropriate, and where mixing qualitative and quantitative meets. Examples include in sports, cooking, weather forecasting, and a lot of other areas that may not be obvious at first sight. Additionally, we have a couple chapters on the ethics behind forecasting.  One area of major concern is that of user privacy.  In order for statistical predictions to be robust, often substantial, and often sensitive, information on users is collected and analyzed (despite what Mark Zuckerberg may say).  We discuss how this data helps prediction, how dangerous it is, but also methods to protect consumers and citizens have been developed, that would hopefully allow malintentioned entities (read: government) to not be able to hoard people's "private" data.  

Finally, this book aims to provide some technical background and introduce some tools for the reader.  This will likely be given to the reader either in an appendix or in a "sidebar" of sorts so as not to distract readers who are not familiar with quantitative methods.  However, compiling the code presented, in python and R, as well as reading through some of the derivations given, would give the reader a leg-up in some basic data analysis.  One complaint I had when reading statistical books when I was first learning was there was no explanation of how I could perform these analyses. In fact, I left the books being interested but having no idea where to start.  Well, this book will give some basic tutorials to at least show the reader where to start.

